Introducing MCP in OpenSearch (#3765)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-05-05-Introducing-MCP-in-OpenSearch.md

            }
        }
    }
}
```

**Step 2: Chat away!**

Open a new chat in Claude desktop, and you'll see the available OpenSearch tools appear in your chat window. You can immediately start asking questions about your OpenSearch data.

**Demo**
![Claude Desktop Demo](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-05-05-Introducing-MCP-in-OpenSearch/claude-desktop-demo.png){: .img-fluid}

### Conclusion

The Standalone OpenSearch MCP Server bridges the gap between advanced AI capabilities and earlier versions of OpenSearch. Organizations can leverage the power of AI agents with their existing OpenSearch deployments without upgrading to version 3.0. Whether you're using Claude, LangChain, or other agent frameworks, the standalone server offers a standardized way to connect AI models with your valuable search data.

The current implementation provides access to core search functionality, with future plans to enhance version-specific tool compatibility. We invite you to explore the demo version and share your feedback as we prepare for the official release. Your input will help shape this solution to better meet the community's needs.

# Section 2: OpenSearch MCP Client

> As part of our comprehensive MCP support, we're also adding MCP Client capabilities to the Agents within OpenSearch as an experimental feature. Starting with OpenSearch 3.0, the [Conversational Agent](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/conversational/) and the newly introduced [Plan, Execute, and Reflect agent](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/plan-execute-reflect/) can connect to external MCP servers and leverage their tools. Support for additional agent types will be available soon!

Reviewer: Link tutorial https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/tutorials/gen-ai/agents/build-plan-execute-reflect-agent/

* **Streamlined infrastructure**: Fully integrated into OpenSearch; no need to deploy, host, or maintain a separate MCP server.
* **Enterprise-grade security**: Uses OpenSearch security for authentication and enforces consistent access control across tools.
* **Enhanced development efficiency**: Offers a standard interface for all tools, removing the need for custom integration code.
* **Framework flexibility**: Works with leading AI frameworks like LangChain, Bedrock, and others.

#### Quickstart

To set up the built-in MCP server in OpenSearch, follow these steps.

**Step 1:** Enable the experimental streaming feature to support SSE

Follow the steps in the [documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/install-and-configure/configuring-opensearch/network-settings/#selecting-the-transport) to install the `transport-reactor-netty4` plugin and enable experimental streaming.

**Step 2:** Enable the experimental MCP Server

```json
PUT /_cluster/settings/
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.mcp_server_enabled": "true"
    }
}
```

> **Step 3:** Register tools

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 3: Register tools**
```

> When the server starts, it doesn't expose any tools. You can register the tools you want it to expose. Here is a minimal example that activates the `ListIndexTool` and `SearchIndexTool`: 

Reviewer 2: "minimal" => "basic"?

> When the server starts, it doesn't expose any tools. You can register the tools you want it to expose. Here is a minimal example that activates the `ListIndexTool` and `SearchIndexTool`: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the server starts, it doesn't expose any tools. You can register the tools you want it to expose. Here is a basic example that activates the `ListIndexTool` and `SearchIndexTool`: 
```

                    "type": "object",
                    "properties": {
                        "input": {
                            "index": {
                                "type": "string",
                                "description": "OpenSearch index name. for example: index1"
                            },
                            "query": {
                                "type": "object",
                                "description": "OpenSearch search index query. You need to get index mapping to write correct search query. It must be a valid OpenSearch query. Valid value:
{\"query\":{\"match\":{\"population_description\":\"seattle 2023 population\"}},\"size\":2,\"_source\":\"population_description\"}
Invalid value: 
{\"match\":{\"population_description\":\"seattle 2023 population\"}}
The value is invalid because the match not wrapped by \"query\".",
                                "additionalProperties": false
                            }
                        }
                    }
                },
                "required": [
                    "input"
                ],
                "strict": false
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

> That's it! The `ListIndexTool` and the `SearchIndexTool` are ready to be used my the MCP Server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That's it! The `ListIndexTool` and `SearchIndexTool` are ready to be used by the MCP server.
```

> **Important Endpoints**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Important endpoints**
```

> * MCP server base url: `/_plugins/_ml/mcp`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* MCP server base URL: `/_plugins/_ml/mcp`
```

> * Message endpoint used internally by the MCP Client: `/_plugins/_ml/mcp/sse/message?sessionId=...`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Message endpoint used internally by the MCP client: `/_plugins/_ml/mcp/sse/message?sessionId=...`
```

**Note**: For Python MCP clients, use this URL to establish the connection: `/_plugins/_ml/mcp/sse?append_to_base_url=true`.

#### Available tools

OpenSearch provides a comprehensive suite of tools that can be registered with the OpenSearch MCP server. For a list of supported tools, see [Tools](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/tools/index/).

#### Authentication

> When connecting to the MCP Server, you'll need to include appropriate authentication headers based on your OpenSearch security setup. The example below shows how to add headers in a LangChain client:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When connecting to the MCP server, you'll need to include appropriate authentication headers based on your OpenSearch security setup. The following example shows you how to add headers to a LangChain client:
```

            agent=AgentType.OPENAI_FUNCTIONS,
            verbose=True,
        )

        # Execute agent with query to list products
        await agent.ainvoke({"input": "List all the products"})

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
```

When executed with a sample `products` index in OpenSearch, the agent demonstrates intelligent tool use. First, it calls the `ListIndexTool` to discover available indexes and then uses the `SearchIndexTool` on the `products` index to retrieve and present the product information in a structured format. This workflow shows how LLMs can autonomously navigate OpenSearch data through MCP tools:

```markdown
> Entering new AgentExecutor chain...
Invoking: `ListIndexTool` with `{'indices': []}`
# Tool finds available indices including "products" index

Invoking: `SearchIndexTool` with `{'input': {'index': 'products', 'query': {'query': {'match_all': {}}}}}`
# Tool returns product data

# Final Response of the Model
Here are the products listed in the OpenSearch index:
1. **Product A**: High-quality leather wallet
2. **Product B**: Eco-friendly bamboo toothbrush
...
```

### Section 1.2: Standalone OpenSearch MCP server

> The built-in MCP server in OpenSearch, described in section 1.1, is only available starting with version 3.0. To use MCP with older versions, you can run the standalone MCP server outside the OpenSearch cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The built-in MCP server in OpenSearch, described in section 1.1, is only available starting with version 3.0. To use MCP with earlier versions, you can run the standalone MCP server outside of the OpenSearch cluster.
```

The standalone architecture uses a straightforward flow:

1. The agent initiates a tool call.

1. The call is forwarded to the standalone MCP server.

1. The MCP server makes REST requests to the OpenSearch cluster, retrieves the necessary data, formats the response, and returns it to the agent.

The flow is shown in the following illustration.

![Standalone MCP Server Architecture](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-05-05-Introducing-MCP-in-OpenSearch/standalone-mcp-architecture.png){: .img-fluid}

> This new standalone MCP server will be officially released soon. But you can test the demo version [here](https://github.com/rithin-pullela-aws/opensearch-mcp-server). For more information about the standalone OpenSearch MCP server, see the [RFC](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3749).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This new standalone MCP server will be officially released soon, but you can test the demo version [here](https://github.com/rithin-pullela-aws/opensearch-mcp-server). For more information about the standalone OpenSearch MCP server, see the [RFC](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3749).
```

Key benefits of using a standalone server include:

> - **Independent operation**: Runs as a separate process outside the OpenSearch cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Independent operation**: Runs as a separate process outside of the OpenSearch cluster.
```

- **Decoupled release cycle**: Can be updated independently of OpenSearch version releases.

- **Flexible communication**: Supports both SSE and `stdio` protocols for agent connectivity.

> - **Seamless integration**: Compatible with tools like Claude Desktop that connect to MCP servers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Seamless integration**: Compatible with tools like Claude for Desktop that connect to MCP servers.
```

- **Broad version support**: Interacts with multiple OpenSearch versions through REST API calls.

#### Quickstart

To set up the standalone MCP server in OpenSearch, follow these steps.

**Step 1: Install the demo PyPI package**

Install our demo PyPI package (official release coming soon):

```bash
pip install test-opensearch-mcp
```

> **Step 2: Start the MCP Server**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 2: Start the MCP server**
```

> For the `stdio` protocol (recommended for Claude desktop), run this command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the `stdio` protocol (recommended for Claude for Desktop), run this command:
```

```bash
python -m mcp_server_opensearch
```

For the SSE protocol (runs on port 9900), run this command:

```bash
python -m mcp_server_opensearch --transport sse
```

#### Authentication methods

Configure your environment variables to connect the MCP server to your OpenSearch cluster:

* Basic authentication:

    ```bash
    export OPENSEARCH_URL="<your_opensearch_domain_url>"
    export OPENSEARCH_USERNAME="<your_opensearch_domain_username>"
    export OPENSEARCH_PASSWORD="<your_opensearch_domain_password>"
    ```

> * IAM role authentication:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) role authentication:
```

    ```bash
    export OPENSEARCH_URL="<your_opensearch_domain_url>"
    export AWS_REGION="<your_aws_region>"
    export AWS_ACCESS_KEY="<your_aws_access_key>"
    export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="<your_aws_secret_access_key>"
    export AWS_SESSION_TOKEN="<your_aws_session_token>"
    ```

#### Available tools

> Currently, these tools are available:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These tools are currently available:
```

* `ListIndexTool`: Lists all indexes in OpenSearch.
* `IndexMappingTool`: Retrieves index mapping and setting information for an index in OpenSearch.
* `SearchIndexTool`: Searches an index using a query in OpenSearch.
* `GetShardsTool`: Gets information about shards in OpenSearch.

For full tool documentation, see the [available tools guide](https://github.com/rithin-pullela-aws/opensearch-mcp-server/blob/main/README.md#available-tools).

We welcome community contributions! Please review our [developer guide](https://github.com/rithin-pullela-aws/opensearch-mcp-server/blob/main/DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md) to learn how to add new tools or enhance existing ones.

> #### Claude Desktop integration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Claude for Desktop integration
```

> Claude Desktop natively supports MCP through the `stdio` protocol, making integration straightforward. To integrate Claude Desktop with the MCP server, follow these steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Claude for Desktop natively supports MCP through the `stdio` protocol, making integration straightforward. To integrate Claude for Desktop with the MCP server, follow these steps.
```

> **Step 1: Configure Claude Desktop**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 1: Configure Claude for Desktop**
```

> * In Claude Desktop, go to **Settings** > **Developer** > **Edit Config**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* In Claude for Desktop, go to **Settings** > **Developer** > **Edit Config**.
```

* Add the OpenSearch MCP server in the `claude_desktop_config.json` file:

```json
{
    "mcpServers": {
        "opensearch-mcp-server": {
            "command": "uvx",
            "args": [
                "test-opensearch-mcp"
            ],
            "env": {
                // Required
                "OPENSEARCH_URL": "<your_opensearch_domain_url>",

                // For Basic Authentication
                "OPENSEARCH_USERNAME": "<your_opensearch_domain_username>",
                "OPENSEARCH_PASSWORD": "<your_opensearch_domain_password>",

                // For IAM Role Authentication
                "AWS_REGION": "<your_aws_region>",
                "AWS_ACCESS_KEY": "<your_aws_access_key>",
                "AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY": "<your_aws_secret_access_key>",
                "AWS_SESSION_TOKEN": "<your_aws_session_token>"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

**Step 2: Chat away!**

> Open a new chat in Claude Desktop; you'll see the available OpenSearch tools appear in your chat window. You can immediately start asking questions about your OpenSearch data. A sample chat is shown in the following image:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open a new chat in Claude for Desktop; you'll see the available OpenSearch tools appear in your chat window. You can immediately start asking questions about your OpenSearch data. A sample chat is shown in the following image.
```

![Claude Desktop Demo](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-05-05-Introducing-MCP-in-OpenSearch/claude-desktop-demo.png){: .img-fluid}

## Section 2: OpenSearch MCP client

As part of our comprehensive MCP support, we're also adding MCP client capabilities to the agents in OpenSearch as an experimental feature. Starting with OpenSearch 3.0, the [conversational agent](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/conversational/) and the newly introduced [plan-execute-reflect agent](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/plan-execute-reflect/) can connect to external MCP servers and use their tools. Support for additional agent types will be available soon!

### Quickstart

While the [full documentation](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/mcp/mcp-connector/) provides detailed step-by-step instructions, here's a simplified view of the process:

> **Step 1: Create an MCP connector**: The connector stores connection details to your MCP server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 1: Create an MCP connector** -- The connector stores connection details on your MCP server.
```

> **Step 2: Register an LLM**: The LLM powers your agent's reasoning capabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 2: Register an LLM** -- The LLM powers your agent's reasoning capabilities.
```

> **Step 3: Configure an agent with MCP tools**: The AI agent integrates the LLM with OpenSearch's powerful data retrieval capabilities:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 3: Configure an agent with MCP tools** -- The AI agent integrates the LLM with OpenSearch's powerful data retrieval capabilities:
```

```json
 "parameters": {
    "_llm_interface": "openai/v1/chat/completions",
    "mcp_connectors": [
        {
        "mcp_connector_id": "<YOUR_CONNECTOR_ID>",
        "tool_filters": [
            "^get_forecast",
            "get_alerts"
        ]
        }
    ]
  }
  ```

The `tool_filters` parameter is particularly powerful. It allows you to precisely control which external tools your agent can access. You can use Java-style regular expressions to select the tools to expose:

>   * Allow all tools from the MCP server (empty array)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Allow all tools from the MCP server (empty array).
```

>   * Select tools by exact name (`search_indices`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Select tools by exact name (`search_indices`).
```

>   * Select tools by a regular expression pattern (`^get_forecast` for all tools starting with "`get_forecast`")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Select tools by a regular expression pattern (`^get_forecast` for all tools starting with "`get_forecast`").
```

> **Step 4: Execute the agent**: Invoke the registered agent by calling the Execute Agent API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Step 4: Execute the agent** -- Invoke the registered agent by calling the Execute Agent API.
```

The agent uses both OpenSearch tools specified in the `tools` array and selected tools from the MCP server based on your tool filters.

### End-to-end example: Cross-cluster data access

This example demonstrates how MCP enables agents to access data across multiple OpenSearch clusters.

**Scenario**:

> * Cluster A contains product catalog data in a `products` index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Cluster A contains product catalog data in a `products` index.
```

> * Cluster B contains product ratings data in a `product_ratings` index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Cluster B contains product ratings data in a `product_ratings` index.
```

> * Goal: Enable an agent in Cluster A to answer questions based on data from both clusters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Goal: Enable an agent in Cluster A to answer questions based on data from both clusters.
```

**Setup**:

* Dataset: [Mock product data](https://github.com/rithin-pullela-aws/opensearch-mock-data)
* Cluster A tools: `ListIndexTool_ClusterA`, `IndexMappingTool_ClusterA`, `SearchIndexTool_ClusterA`
* Cluster B tools (accessed through MCP): `ListIndexTool_ClusterB`, `IndexMappingTool_ClusterB`, `SearchIndexTool_ClusterB`

**Agent execution**:

> Using the [plan-execute-reflect agent](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/plan-execute-reflect/), we asked the question:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the [plan-execute-reflect agent](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/agents/plan-execute-reflect/), ask the following question:
```

```json
You have access to data from 2 OpenSearch clusters, Cluster A and Cluster B. Using data from these clusters, answer this: List 10 kid toy products with high ratings.
```

> **Agent response with a detailed steps breakdown**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**The agent responds with a detailed breakdown of the steps**:
```

   - Cluster A: 'products' index containing product descriptions
   - Cluster B: 'product_ratings' index containing product ratings

2. I examined the index structures using mapping tools:
   - The products index contains product_id and text fields
   - The product_ratings index contains product_id and rating fields

3. I executed multiple targeted searches to find toy products using keywords like:
   - toy, game, puzzle, stuffed, doll, action figure, board game, LEGO
   - Additional searches for brands like Fisher-Price, Melissa & Doug, etc.

4. I cross-referenced the product IDs of toy items with their ratings from Cluster B

5. I compiled and sorted the results by rating to identify the top 10 highest-rated kid toy products

The final list includes a diverse selection of toys across multiple categories including educational toys, plush toys, puzzles, dolls, building sets, vehicles, action toys, and board games. The two products with perfect 10/10 ratings (Fisher-Price Laugh & Learn Smart Stages Puppy and Melissa & Doug Farm Animals Sound Puzzle) are both educational toys designed for younger children.

```

## Conclusion

> MCP represents a transformative approach to AI-search integration, standardizing how AI agents interact with OpenSearch data and external tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MCP represents a transformative approach to AI search integration, standardizing how AI agents interact with OpenSearch data and external tools.
```

> The **built-in OpenSearch MCP server** represents a significant advancement in how AI agents can interact with your search and analytics data. By providing a standardized interface, it eliminates the need for custom integration code and allows for faster, more secure deployment of Agentic search and analytics applications. While currently experimental, the MCP Server in OpenSearch 3.0 lays the groundwork for more sophisticated AI agent interactions with your valuable search data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **built-in OpenSearch MCP server** represents a significant advancement in how AI agents can interact with your search and analytics data. By providing a standardized interface, it eliminates the need for custom integration code and allows for faster, more secure deployment of agentic search and analytics applications. While currently experimental, the MCP server in OpenSearch 3.0 lays the groundwork for more sophisticated AI agent interactions with your valuable search data.
```

The **standalone OpenSearch MCP server** bridges the gap between advanced AI capabilities and earlier versions of OpenSearch. You can use the power of AI agents with your existing OpenSearch deployment without upgrading to version 3.0. Whether you're using Claude, LangChain, or other agent frameworks, the standalone server offers a standardized way to connect AI models with your valuable search data.

The current implementation provides access to the core search functionality, with future plans to enhance version-specific tool compatibility. We invite you to explore the demo version and share your feedback as we prepare for the official release. Your input will help shape this solution to better meet the community's needs.

> The **OpenSearch MCP client** allows OpenSearch agents to connect to external tool providers through the MCP protocol, significantly expanding their capabilities beyond native OpenSearch functions. Rather than being limited to built-in tools, agents can use specialized external services like weather forecasts, translation APIs, document processing tools, and more. This interoperability helps position OpenSearch agents as versatile orchestrators that can coordinate across diverse systems and data sources. As this experimental feature matures, we anticipate a growing ecosystem of MCP-compatible tools that will make OpenSearch agents increasingly powerful for solving complex, multi-step tasks. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **OpenSearch MCP client** allows OpenSearch agents to connect to external tool providers through the MCP protocol, significantly expanding their capabilities beyond native OpenSearch functions. Rather than being limited to built-in tools, agents can use specialized external services like weather forecasts, translation APIs, document processing tools, and more. This interoperability helps position OpenSearch agents as versatile orchestrators that can coordinate across diverse systems and data sources. As this experimental feature matures, we anticipate a growing ecosystem of MCP-compatible tools that will make OpenSearch agents increasingly capable of executing complex, multi-step tasks. 
```

## Try MCP 

> To transform how your AI agents interact with data, try MCP and let us know what you think. We invite you to not only explore these capabilities in OpenSearch 3.0 but also contribute to the development of this emerging standard. We welcome your feedback in the [ML Commons repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/) or on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To transform how your AI agents interact with data, try MCP and let us know what you think. We invite you to not only explore these capabilities in OpenSearch 3.0 but also to contribute to the development of this emerging standard. We welcome your feedback in the [ML Commons repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/) or on the [OpenSearch forum](https://forum.opensearch.org/)!
```

---
layout: post
title: "Introducing MCP in OpenSearch"
authors:
  - rithinp
  - zanniu
  - ylwu
  - yych
  - kolchfa

> date: 2025-05-05

Reviewer 4: Update to: 20205-05-15

> date: 2025-05-05

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date: 2025-05-15
```

categories:
  - technical-posts

> meta_keywords: MCP, OpenSearch, AI agents, tool calling, LangChain, Claude

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
meta_keywords: Model context protocol, OpenSearch MCP server, AI integration, ML commons, OpenSearch 3.0, AI agents, what is MCP, try MCP, Langchain, ListIndexTool, SearchIndexTool
```

> meta_description: Learn about OpenSearch's new Model Context Protocol (MCP) support, enabling AI agents to safely and efficiently interact with your search data through standardized tool interfaces.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
meta_description: OpenSearch now supports Model Context Protocol (MCP), a framework simplifying AI agent integration with search tools. Learn how MCP reduces development complexity and enables seamless AI-powered data access for enhanced search solutions.
```

> meta_description: Learn about OpenSearch's new Model Context Protocol (MCP) support, enabling AI agents to safely and efficiently interact with your search data through standardized tool interfaces.

Reviewer 3: @pajuric Date and meta updated. I reworded the description a bit because MCP is an external tool that OpenSearch now supports. Please take a look.

> meta_description: Learn about OpenSearch's new Model Context Protocol (MCP) support, enabling AI agents to safely and efficiently interact with your search data through standardized tool interfaces.

Author: @kolchfa-aws thank you for updating!

---
layout: post

> title: "Introducing MCP in OpenSearch"

Author: I chose "Introducing MCP in OpenSearch" because it clearly communicates that the post is about a new feature, aligning with how we typically title launch content. It’s more discoverable for users specifically looking for MCP support in OpenSearch 3.0, whereas "OpenSearch in an MCP world" feels broader and less immediately clear.

Tagging @kolchfa-aws @pajuric @ylwu-amzn for your thoughts—would love your input on which title fits better.

> title: "Introducing MCP in OpenSearch"

Reviewer 3: I would keep as is: it's clear and reflects the blog contents. Alternatively, we can get more specific: "Streamline LLM integration using MCP in OpenSearch" or "MCP in OpenSearch: Create a more powerful search by standardizing AI agent communications" or variations of such.

authors:
  - ylwu

>   - rithinp

Reviewer: `rithinp` is the main writer, suggest move him to the first

>   - rithinp

Reviewer 5: you need to add Zan and me also.

Author: Yes, absolutely!

date: 2025-05-05
categories:
  - technical-posts
meta_keywords: MCP, OpenSearch, AI agents, tool calling, LangChain, Claude
meta_description: Learn about OpenSearch's new MCP (Model Control Protocol) support, enabling AI agents to safely and efficiently interact with your search data through standardized tool interfaces.
---

> [The Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/introduction) is a standardized communication framework that solves the integration complexity between AI agents and external tools. Without MCP, developers face significant technical overhead as each tool integration requires implementing custom code for specific API endpoints, parameter schemas, response formats, and error handling patterns. This fragmentation creates maintenance challenges and slows development velocity. MCP addresses these issues by providing a unified protocol layer with consistent interfaces for tool discovery, parameter validation, response formatting, and error handling. The protocol establishes a contract between agent frameworks and tool providers, enabling seamless interoperability through standardized JSON payloads and well-defined behavioral expectations. This standardization means developers can integrate new tools with minimal code changes, as the agent only needs to communicate with MCP's consistent interface rather than learning each tool's proprietary API structure.

Reviewer: `The protocol establishes a contract between agent frameworks and tool providers`

MCP not only limited to Agent Frameworks. Change this to be more generic ? 

`The protocol establishes a contract between AI applications and tool providers' servers`

> ![MCP Architecture Comparison](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-05-05-Introducing-MCP-in-OpenSearch/mcp-architecture.png){: .img-fluid}

Author: I have updated the latest diagrams(suggested by you) and incorporated your feedback into the blog

> This diagram shows the difference. On the left, the agent is directly connected to every tool. On the right, MCP sits in the middle. The result is a much cleaner and more scalable setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This diagram shows the difference:
On the left, the agent connects directly to each tool, requiring custom integration for every connection.
On the right, MCP serves as an intermediary layer, simplifying communication and creating a cleaner, more scalable architecture.
```

# Section 1: OpenSearch MCP Server

## Section 1.1: Built in MCP Server

OpenSearch 3.0 ships an experimental MCP Server inside the ML Commons plugin. The server publishes a core set of tools as first‑class MCP endpoints over a streaming SSE interface (`/_plugins/_ml/mcp/sse`). An LLM agent —for example, LangChain’s ReAct agent—can simply connect and discover what the server offers, and then invoke the tools with JSON arguments without you writing any adapter code or opening up ad-hoc REST endpoints.

The OpenSearch MCP Server solves the last-mile problem of giving agents safe and real-time access to your search data. In practice this means that every index in the cluster - your product catalog, logs, or vector store can all be queried, summarized, or cross-referenced by whatever agent framework you prefer via the MCP server.

![MCP Server Architecture](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-05-05-Introducing-MCP-in-OpenSearch/mcp-server-architecture.png){: .img-fluid}

### Quick Start:

To setup the MCP server inside OpenSearch, follow these steps:

**Step 1:** Enable the Experimental Streaming feature to support SSE:

> Follow the steps in this document to install the `transport-reactor-netty4` plugin and enable Experimental Streaming.

Reviewer: > Follow the steps in this document

Which document? Add link ?

**Step 2:** Enable the experimental MCP Server:

```json
PUT /_cluster/settings/
{
    "persistent": {
        "plugins.ml_commons.mcp_server_enabled": "true"
    }
}
```

**Step 3:** Register tools:

The server starts empty, so you register whichever tools you want it to expose. Here is a minimal example that activates the `ListIndexTool` and `SearchIndexTool`. 
Note: All properties must be wrapped inside an "input" field within the schema, as shown below:

```json
POST /_plugins/_ml/mcp/tools/_register
{
    "tools": [
        {
            "type": "ListIndexTool",
            "name": "My_ListIndexTool",
            "description": "Lists index of Opensearch CLuster A",
            "attributes": {

>                 "input_schema": {

Reviewer: We have default input schema for this tool. Is this mandatory ?

Author: Yes it is mandatory, it fails with the default schema

Author: Created an issue to track it: https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3834

### Conclusion

The OpenSearch MCP Server represents a significant advancement in how AI agents can interact with your search and analytics data. By providing a standardized interface, it eliminates the need for custom integration code and allows for faster, more secure deployment of Agentic search and analytics applications.
Key benefits include:

* Unified Data Platform Integration: OpenSearch provides native capabilities for AI agents to seamlessly perform search, analytics and vector store capabilities.
* Enhanced Development Efficiency: standard interface across all tools; Elimination of custom integration code
* Enterprise-Grade Security: Integrated authentication through OpenSearch security; Consistent access control mechanisms
* Framework Flexibility: Compatible with leading AI frameworks like LangChain, Bedrock etc

While currently experimental, the MCP Server in OpenSearch 3.0 lays the groundwork for more sophisticated AI agent interactions with your valuable search data.

## Section 1.2: Standalone OpenSearch MCP server

> While the solution described in Section 1.1 has the MCP server integrated within OpenSearch, we understand that this built-in functionality is only available from version 3.0. To address this limitation, we've developed a Standalone MCP Server that operates as a separate process outside the OpenSearch cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Built-in MCP server in OpenSearch is only available from version 3.0. To run MCP on older versions, you can run Standalone MCP Server outside OpenSearch cluster.
```

> This external server communicates with your OpenSearch cluster via REST API calls, allowing it to work with any version of OpenSearch. By positioning the MCP server outside the cluster architecture, it becomes completely version-agnostic, bringing all the benefits of MCP functionality to users regardless of which OpenSearch version they're running.

Reviewer: This paragraph has some duplicate part as first paragraph in section 1.2.  Let's combine them ? Only new useful info in this paragraph is `This external server communicates with your OpenSearch cluster via REST API calls`

Reviewer: > This external server communicates with your OpenSearch cluster via REST API calls

This also seems duplicate with the last paragraph in this section

> The standalone architecture follows a simple flow: the agent triggers a tool call, which is forwarded to the OpenSearch MCP server. The server then performs REST calls to the OpenSearch cluster, retrieves the required data, formats it, and returns the result back to the client.

Suggest restructure this section:

Paragraph 1: explain the limitation of built-in MCP server, and introduce standalone MCP server, and the release plan
Paragraph 2: explain the architecture and workflow of standalone MCP server.
Paragraph 3: explain the benefits

This new Standalone MCP Server will be officially released soon. But you can test the demo version [here](https://github.com/rithin-pullela-aws/opensearch-mcp-server)

You can find more details about the Standalone OpenSearch MCP server in the [RFC](https://github.com/opensearch-project/ml-commons/issues/3749)

**Key Benefits of the Standalone Approach**

* Runs Independently: Operates as a separate process outside the OpenSearch cluster
* Version Agnostic: Compatible with any OpenSearch version through REST API calls
* Independent Release Cycle: Updates don't depend on OpenSearch releases
* Flexible Communication: Supports both SSE and stdio protocols
* Simple Integration: Works with solutions like Claude Desktop which integrate with MCP servers

![Standalone MCP Server Architecture](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-05-05-Introducing-MCP-in-OpenSearch/standalone-mcp-architecture.png){: .img-fluid}

The standalone architecture follows a simple flow: the agent triggers a tool call, which is forwarded to the OpenSearch MCP server. The server then performs REST calls to the OpenSearch cluster, retrieves the required data, formats it, and returns the result back to the client.

> ### Quick Start Guide:

Author: I will rewrite it better as per your suggestions in the above comment
Paragraph 1: explain the limitation of built-in MCP server, and introduce standalone MCP server, and the release plan
Paragraph 2: explain the architecture and workflow of standalone MCP server. And link the RFC and Demo code
Paragraph 3: explain the benefits

Stay tuned for the official release, and we encourage you to test the demo version and provide feedback to help us improve this solution.

# Section 2: OpenSearch MCP Client

As part of our comprehensive MCP support, we're also adding MCP Client capabilities to the Agents within OpenSearch as an experimental feature. Starting with OpenSearch 3.0, the Conversational Agent and the newly introduced Plan, Execute, and Reflect agent can connect to external MCP servers and leverage their tools. Support for additional agent types will be available soon!

For detailed implementation steps, see our documentation: https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/blob/ab15e100326a390251241e197fc9391deb09b095/_ml-commons-plugin/agents-tools/mcp/mcp-connector.md

> ### Quick Start Guide:

Reviewer: This part seems same with the Standalone MCP server readme . Should we ask user to refer to that readme ? I don't have strong opinion on this though.

                },
                {
                    "name": "response",
                    "result": "There is a Wind Advisory for the Kittitas Valley in Washington. Here are the details:\n\n- **Event:** Wind Advisory\n- **Area:** Kittitas Valley\n- **Severity:** Moderate\n- **Description:** Northwest winds 25 to 35 mph with gusts up to 45 mph expected.\n- **When:** From 2 PM to 8 PM PDT Tuesday.\n- **Impacts:** Gusty winds may blow around unsecured objects, potentially causing tree limbs to fall, and resulting in a few power outages.\n\n**Instructions:** These strong winds can make driving difficult, especially for high-profile vehicles. Use extra caution if you are traveling in the area."
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

This demonstrates that our agent is able to successfully use the tools from the MCP server.

> ### End-to-End Example: Cross-Cluster Data Access

Reviewer: This part is not clear to me. 
1. The quick start part already have one end to end example. What's the purpose of adding another end to end example here. 
2. Explain the benefit of this end to end example for accessing data in another cluster ?

Reviewer: To avoid too long blog, how about build a tutorial for this more complex end to end example and add a link to this blog ? So if needed, user can read this tutorial for details.

This example demonstrates a practical use case: connecting to external MCP servers to access data across multiple OpenSearch clusters.

#### Scenario

Consider two OpenSearch clusters:

* Cluster A contains product catalog data
* Cluster B contains product ratings data

We want an agent that can answer questions requiring data from both clusters.

#### Data setup

Cluster A - Products Index:

```json

> { "product_id": "11111111-aaaa-aaaa-aaaa-111111111111", "name": "car toy", "description": "f1 car toy" }

Reviewer: The product id looks like toy data set. Let's use some data from ML playground ?

{ "product_id": "22222222-bbbb-bbbb-bbbb-222222222222", "name": "bike toy", "description": "motogp bike toy" }
{ "product_id": "33333333-cccc-cccc-cccc-333333333333", "name": "Samsung earphones", "description": "buds 2" }
{ "product_id": "44444444-dddd-dddd-dddd-444444444444", "name": "Apple earphones", "description": "Airpods 2" }
```

Cluster B - Product_Ratings Index:

```json
{ "product_id": "11111111-aaaa-aaaa-aaaa-111111111111", "Rating": 5 }
{ "product_id": "22222222-bbbb-bbbb-bbbb-222222222222", "Rating": 4 }
{ "product_id": "33333333-cccc-cccc-cccc-333333333333", "Rating": 5 }
{ "product_id": "44444444-dddd-dddd-dddd-444444444444", "Rating": 4 }
```

> #### Tools

Reviewer: We have two clusters A and B. Which one functions as the MCP client, which one functions as MCP server ?

Why need to mention tools available in both clusters ?

Author: Addressed in the newer commit

Tools Available in Cluster A:

* ListIndexTool_ClusterA: Lists all indices in OpenSearch Cluster A
* IndexMappingTool_ClusterA: Retrieves index mapping information for Cluster A indices
* SearchIndexTool_ClusterA: Searches indices in Cluster A using query DSL

Tools Available via MCP from Cluster B:

* ListIndexTool_ClusterB: Lists all indices in OpenSearch Cluster B
* IndexMappingTool_ClusterB: Retrieves index mapping information for Cluster B indices
* SearchIndexTool_ClusterB: Searches indices in Cluster B using query DSL

> #### Agent Execution

Reviewer: Agent creation part is missing. Either add that part or add a link to refer to?

Author: We are describing a use case here, the steps are provided in the Quick Start guide section. I also linked the documentation for more details

> Using the Plan, Execute, and Reflect agent, we asked:

Reviewer: Which cluster the Agent runs in ?
